Linear and Geometric Algebra (A. Macdonald): Chapter 5.2 Exercises
==================================================================
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### 5.5.

#### 5.5.a.

__Problem__. Define scalar multiplication of $a \mathbf{T}$ of oriented solids.

__Solution__. The scalar multiple $a \mathbf{T}$ is an oriented solid with
norm equal to $|a|$ times the norm of $\mathbf{T}$. If $a > 0$, then
$a \mathbf{T}$ has the same orientation of $\mathbf{T}$. If $a < 0$, then
$a \mathbf{T}$ has the opposite orientation of $\mathbf{T}$.

#### 5.5.b.

__Problem__. Let $\mathbf{T}_0$ be a nonzero oriented solid. Show that every
oriented solid $\mathbf{T}$ is a scalar multiple of $\mathbf{T}_0$:
$\mathbf{T} = a \mathbf{T}_0$.

__Solution__. Let $\mathbf{T}$ be an oriented solid. Define $a$ so that

* $|a| = |\mathbf{T}| / |\mathbf{T}_0|$ and

* $sgn(a) = 1$ if $\mathbf{T}$ has the same orientation as $\mathbf{T}_0$; and
  $sgn(a) = -1$ if $\mathbf{T}$ has the opposite orientation as $\mathbf{T}_0$.

With these definitions, $\mathbf{T} = a \mathbf{T}_0$.

#### 5.5.c.

__Problem__. Two solids $a \mathbf{T}_0$ and $b \mathbf{T}_0$ have the same
orientation if $a$ and $b$ have the same sign. Otherwise they have the opposite
orientation. Define addition $\mathbf{T}_1 + \mathbf{T}_2$ of oriented
solids.

__Solution__. Let $\mathbf{T}_1 = a_1 \mathbf{T}_0$ and
$\mathbf{T}_2 = a_2 \mathbf{T}_0$. We can define addition of $\mathbf{T}_1$ and
$\mathbf{T}_2$ by: $\mathbf{T}_1 + \mathbf{T}_2 = (a_1 + a_2) \mathbf{T}_0$.

#### 5.5.d.

__Problem__. Define the zero oriented solid.

__Solution__. The zero oriented solid $\mathbf{0}$ has norm 0 and no
orientation. It satisfies $\mathbf{T} + \mathbf{0} = \mathbf{T}$ and
$0 \mathbf{T} = \mathbf{0}$.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### 5.6.

__Problem__. Let $\mathbf{T}$ be an oriented solid. Show that
$a (b \mathbf{T}) = (ab) \mathbf{T}$.

__Solution__. $b \mathbf{T}$ is an oriented solid with norm $|b|$ times
$|\mathbf{T}|$. $a (b \mathbf{T})$ is an oriented area with norm $|a|$ times
$|b \mathbf{T}|$, so it has norm $|ab|$ times $|\mathbf{T}|$. $(ab) \mathbf{T}$
is also an oriented area with norm $|ab|$ times $|\mathbf{T}|$, so
$|a (b \mathbf{T})| = |(ab) \mathbf{T}|$. It is straightforward to check that
$a (b \mathbf{T})$ and $(ab) \mathbf{T}$ have the same orientation for all
four cases of the sign of $a$ and $b$. Since $a (b \mathbf{T})$ and
$(ab) \mathbf{T}$ have the same norm and have the same orientation, they are
equal.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### 5.7.

__Problem__. Show that $\mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{w}$ has
the opposite orientation of $\mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{w}$.
Thus

$$
\mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{w}
= -(\mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{w}).
$$

__Solution__. Consider the rotations generated by rotating $\mathbf{v}$,
$\mathbf{u}$, and $\mathbf{w}$ cyclicly. Observe that the rotation generated by
rotating $\mathbf{v}$ to $\mathbf{u}$ is in the opposite direction as the
rotation generated by rotating $\mathbf{u}$ to $\mathbf{v}$. Similarly, we find
that the rotation directions are opposite for the other two pairs of vectors.
Therefore, $\mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{w}$ and
$\mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{w}$ have opposite orientations.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### 5.8.

__Problem__.

$$
\mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{w} \wedge \mathbf{u}
= \pm (\mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{w}).
$$

Which sign is correct? Why?

__Solution__. Rotating $\mathbf{v}$, $\mathbf{w}$, and $\mathbf{u}$ cyclicly,
we find that the rotations are in the same direction as for
$\mathbf{u} \wedge \mathbf{v} \wedge \mathbf{w}$, so the $+$ is the correct
sign.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
